In the beginning of the semester, I was lucky enough to have taken a vacation to the Hawaiian Islands with my family. While we were there we decided to take an excursion to the top of the Mauna Kea summit, one of the 5 mountains which make up the Big Island of Hawaii. We participated in the Stargazing Tour Adventure where we toured from our hotel in Kona, HI all the way up to the steep mountain of Mauna Kea and then partially back down to a via point on the mountain where we were able to stargaze with hobbyist telescopes.

Guided by our Hawaiian-local tour guide we learned about the past Hawaiian history and how the Ancient Hawaiians initially navigated their way to and from the island. We also got the chance to explore the various locations leading up to the summit, including the visitor’s center at 9000ft elevation where we ate dinner and acclimated to the altitude and thinning atmosphere as well as the various cabins where the astronomers and telescope engineers lived for easy access to the summit at 13,700ft where the observatories where located.

After exploring the summit for about an hour and watching the sunset, we made our way back down to a site on the mountain where we were able to pull off and look at the stars through telescopes. Our tour guide pointed out various planets we were able to see such as Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. It was such an exciting experience and I enjoyed every minute of it!

I will end the post with a fun fact I learned from our tour guide about Ancient Hawaiian navigation. There is a very well-known hand gesture in Hawaiian culture known as the Shaka (commonly known as the “hang loose” gesture). This gesture takes on a lot of meanings in the Hawaiian culture, but one thing I was surprised to learn was that it was also used as a measurement reference for Ancient Hawaiians to locate Polaris! By taking you hand and making the Shaka symbol, extend your arm and place your pinkie finger on the horizon. Your thumb should roughly match up to the elevation of which Polaris is located (I tried it and it actually worked!). I found this to be a fascinating trick the early Hawaiian settlers used for navigational purposes.

I’ve attached a few pictures of the journey I took with my family.
